# README

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing - see for example [this article](http://www.insideactivitytracking.com/data-science-activity-tracking-and-the-battle-for-the-worlds-top-sports-brand/). Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users.

In this project, data collected from the accelerometer and gyroscope of the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone was retrieved, worked with, and cleaned, to prepare a tidy data that can be used for later analysis.

This repository contains the following files:

- `README.md`: this file.

- `tidy_data.txt`: tidy dataset generated by `run_analysis.R`.

- `CodeBook.md`: Describes `tidy_data.txt` contents.

- `run_analysis.R`: R script that performed all transformations.


For more information, please visit [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones#), which contains information about the original dataset used.

> The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING\_UPSTAIRS, WALKING\_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.
>



The R script `run_analysis.R` was used to create the data set. In general, the following steps are followed to get the `tidy_data.txt`:

1. All files are downloaded from the cloud as a .zip file.
2. Zip file contents are extracted and placed in a directory.
3. All files are loaded into R using data.table `fread` function for fast reads.
4. Measure vector is subset to get only mean and standard deviation measurements.
5. Variable names are manipulated using text functions to output meaningful names.
6. Train and test subjects, labels and vector data is pasted horizontally.
7. Activity names are merged with the dataset from step 6.
8. Aggregations are performed to get the `tidy_data.txt` dataset.